I. MILTIADES, 1. 4-11. 4

inhabitants of that island under the sway of the
Athenians, he demanded of the L emnians that they
should voluntarily accept that condition They
replied ironically that they would do so, whenex er
he should set sail from his home and come to Lemnos
driven by Aquilo. But that wind, since it blows
from the north, is dead ahead for those who sail
from Athens. Miltiades, having no time to lose,
kept on to his destination and arrived at the Cher-
sonesus.

2. There he soon dispersed the forces of the
barbarians, and having gained possession of the
entire region that he had 1n view, he fortified strategio
points with strongholds, settled on farms the com-
pany which he had brought W1th him, and enriched
them by frequent raids. In that whole enterprise
his success was due not less to statesmanship than
to good fortune3 for when, thanks to the valour of
his soldiers‚ he had vanquished the enemy, he
organized the colony with the utmost impartiality
and decided to make his own home there. As a
matter of fact, he enjoyed the rank of king among
the colonists without having that title, an honour
which he owed to his justice no less than to his
position of authority. Nevertheless, he continued
to do his duty by the Athenians, who had sent him
to Thrace3 and as a result he retained permanent
authority, no less with the consent of those who
had sent him than of those who had taken part in
the expedition.

After the Chersonesus was thus organized, Milti-
ades returned to Lemnos and demanded the sur·
render of the city1 according to the agreement.
For they had said that they would give themselves

375

