BOOK 1. xm,

thus at the same time completed the subjugation of
Italy and inaugurated the triumphs of Rome beyond
the sea. Tarentum, built by the Lacedaemoniam,
formerly the capital of Calabria, Apulia and all
Lucania, is famous for its size, its walls and its
harbour, and admired for its situation; for lying
at the very exit of the Adriatic it sends forth its
ships to all lands, to lstria, Illyricum, Epirus,
Achaea, Africa and Sicily. The theatre lies imme-
diately above the harbour in such a position as to
command a view of the sea, and this was the cause
of all the missortunes which befell the unhappy
city. They happened to be celebrating a festival
when they saw the Roman fleet rowing towards the
shore, and thinking that they were enemies, they
rushed out and began to hurl indiscriminate insults
at them, asking who the Romans where and whence
they had come. Nor was this all; for when an
embassy immediately came and lodged a complaint,
they foully affronted them also by a shameful and
indecent insult. The result was a declaration of
war. The preparations inspired terror, so numerous
were the peoples who rose in the defence of the
Tarentines, of whom the most active was Pyrrhus,
who came to protect a city which was half Greek
through its Lacedaemonian founders, with all the
forces of Epirus, Thessaly and Macedonia, and with
elephants, till then unknown in Italy, threatening
Rome by land and sea, with men, horses and arms
and the added terror of wild beasts.

The first battle was fought in the consulship of
Laevinusl at Heraclea in Campania, near the river
Liris, and was so fierce that Obsidius, the com-
mander of the Ferentanean squadron, charged the

59

