BOOK I. xxxin.

have been carried by assault had not the gallant
Roman leaders, in the hour of victory, been sur-
prised and killed by Carthaginian craft, when they
had been successful by land and sea. And so, that
other Scipio, afterwards to be known as Africanus,
coming to avenge his father and uncle, entered as
it were a new and unimpaired province. After
immediately capturing Carthagel and other cities,
not content with having expelled the Carthaginians,
he made Spain into a province paying tribute to
Rome, and subdued all the inhabitants on both sides
of the Iberus, and was the first Roman general to
reach Gades and the shores of the Ocean as a
conqueror. It is easier to create than to retain a
province. Generals were, therefore, sent to deal
with the inhabitants in detail, now to this region
and now to that, who, with much toil and after
sanguinary encounters, taught submission to savage
races who had hitherto been free and were,
therefore, impatient of the yoke. Cato, the
well-known censor, broke the resistance of the
Celtiberians, the flower of Spanish manhood, in
several battles. Gracchus, the famous father of the
Gracchi, punished the same race by the destruction
of a hundred and fifty cities. Metellus, who had
won in Macedonia the title of Macedonicus, deserved
also that of Celtibericus, after he had achieved a
notable exploit in the capture of Contrebia and had
gained still greater glory by sparing Nertobriga.
Lucullus conquered the Turduli and Vaccaei, from
whom the younger Scipio had won the spolia opima in
a single combat to which their king had challenged
him. Decimus Brutus conquered a much wider
district, which included the Celts and Lusitanians

147

