XXV. ATTICL'S, iux. 4—xx. 5

had a grand-daughter by Agrippa, to whom he had
united his daughter in her first marriage. This
grand-daughter, when she was barely a year old,
Caesar betrothed to his stepson Tiberius Claudius
Nero, son of Drusilla, a union which sealed the friend-
ship of the ruler with Atticus and made their inter-
course more frequent.

20. Even before this betrothal, when Octavian was
absent from the city, he never sent a letter to any
one of his friends without letting Atticus know what
he was doing, in particular what he was reading, where
he was going, and how long he intended to stay3 and
even when he was in Rome, but because of his count-
less engagements could not enjoy Atticus' society as
often as he wished, hardly even a single day passed
that he did not write to him, now asking some question
about ancient history, now putting before him some
difficult passage in the poets, sometimes in jesting
fashion trying to induce him to write longer letters.
It was owing to that intimacy that when the temple
of Jupiter Feretrius, which had been built on the
Capitol by Romulus, through lapse of time and neglect
was without a roof, and was falling into ruin, Caesar
was led by Atticus' advice to have it restored. Mark
Antony too, although far away, carried on a corre-
spondence with Atticus, and even took pains to send
him word from the ends of the earth of what he was
doing. What this means will more easily be under-
stood by one who can judge how great tact it requires
to retain the intimacy and good-will of men who were
not only rivals in affairs of the greatest importance‚
but also such enemies as Caesar and Antony inevit-

 

⁴ intercedere, Aldu3; incidere, MSS„ omitted by Rosius.

RN. Z 689

