BOOK 11. xxvme—xxx.

XXVIII. Tm: DAcrAN WAn

Tm: Dacians cling close to the mountains, whence,
whenever the Danube froze and bridged itself, under
the command of their King Cotiso, they used to make
descents and ravage the neighbouring districts.
Though they were most difficult to approach, Caesar
resolved to drive back this people. He, therefore,
sent Lentulus and pushed them beyond the further
bank of the river3 and garrisons were posted on the
nearer bank. On this occasion then Dacia was not
subdued, but its inhabitants were moved on and
reserved for future conquest.

XXVIIII. Tm: SARMATxAN VVAR

THE Sarmatians range on horseback over wide-
spreading plains. Them too it was deemed sufficient
to debar from access to the Danube, and Lentulus
was entrusted with this task also. Their territory
consists entirely of snow, ice and forest. So bar-
barous are they that they do not even understand
what peace is.

XXX. Tm: GERMAN WAR

ΙΤ could be wished that Caesar had not set such
store on conquering Germany also. Its loss was a
disgrace which far outweighed the glory of its ac-
quisition. But since he was well aware that his
father, Gaius Caesar, had twice crossed the Rhine
by bridging it and sought hostilities against Germany,
he had conceived the desire of making it into
a province to do him honour. His object would
have been achieved if the barbarians could have
tolerated our vices as well as they tolerated our rule.

335

