BOOK Ι. Χιν.

the ocean, retiring with usual fall of tide in the very
middle of the engagement, seemed to take part in
the struggle. The operations of the war varied with
the nature of the people and the country. The
crafty Aquitani betook themselves to caves3 Caesar
ordered that they should be blockaded there. The
Morini scattered amongst their forests; Caesar
ordered that the forests should be burnt. Let no
one say that the Gauls are mere savages, for they
can act with cunning. Indutiomarus stirred up
the Treveri, Ambiorix the Eburones. In Caesar’s
absence these two tribes banded together and
attacked the lieutenant-generals. Indutiomarus was
bravely repulsed by Dolabella, and his head was
brought back to the camp. Ambiorix, however,
defeated us by the stratagem of an ambush set in a
valley, with the result that our camp was plundered
and we lost the lieutenant-generals Aurunculeius
Cotta and Titurius Sabinus. No immediate vengeance
was taken upon the king, who eluded our vigilance
by perpetual ssight across the Rhine.

The Rhine, therefore, was not left unattacked ; for
indeed it was not right that it should harbour and
protect our enemies with impunity. The first battle
against the Germans on this river was fought on the
most just of pretexts; for the Aedui complained of
their incursions. And how great was the insolence
of King Ariovistus! When our ambassadors told
him to come to Caesar, he rephed, “ Who is Caesar?
Let him come to me if he likes: what does it matter
to him what we in Germany do? Do Ι interfere
with the Romans ? '’ So great was the alarm
inspired in the camp by this unknown people, that
there was a general making of wills even in the

203

