BOOK Ι. xxxv.-xxxv1.

The latter, however, not forgetful of the traditions
of his family and of the Roman name, blinded with
a stick the barbarian who was guarding him and
thus provoked him, as was his purpose, to put him
to death. Aristonicus was soon afterwards over-
come by Perperna and taken prisoner, and was
kept in chains after resigning his claims. Aquilius
finally brought the Asiatic war to a close by the
wicked expedient of poisoning the springs in order
to procure the surrender of certain cities. This,
though it hastened his victory, brought shame upon
it, for he had disgraced the Roman arms, which had
hitherto been unsullied‚ by the use of foul drugs
in violation of the laws of heaven and the practice
of our forefathers.

XXXVI. THE JUGURTHINE WAR

l. So much for events in the East3 in the South
there was not the same tranquillity. Who, after the
sate of Carthage, could expect another war to arise
in Africa? Yet Numidia bestirred herself in a
serious effort, and there was something in Jugurtha
to make him an object of dread as the successor of
Hannibal. This crafty king used his wealth to
attack the Roman people when they were invincible
with armS. Contrary to general expectation, fate
decreed that a king pre-eminent in stratagem should
himself be ensnared by a stratagem. J ugurtha, the
grandson of Massinissa and the adopted son of
Micipsa, having, in his hurry to possess kingly
power, determined to put his brothers to death, was
less afraid of them than of the Roman senate and
people, in whose allegiance and under whose pro-
tection the kingdom then was ; he, therefore, relied

161

