BOOK ΙΙ. xxx.-xxxu.

against the legal pleaders. They put out the eyes
of some of them and cut off the hands of others3
they sewed up the mouth of one of them after first
cutting out his tongue, which one of the barbarians
held in his hand, exclaiming‚ “At last, you viper,
you have ceased to hiss.'' The body too of the
consul himself, which the dutiful affection of the
soldiers had buried, was disinterred. As for the
standards and eagles, the barbarians possess two to
this day; the third eagle was wrenched from its
pole, before it could fall into the hands of the
enemy, by the standard-bearer, who, carrying it
conoealed in the folds round his belt, secreted him-
self in the blood-stained marsh. The result of this
disaster was that the empire, which had not stopped

on the shores of the Ocean, was checked on the
banks of the Rhine.

XXXI. Tm: GAm’umAN WAa

Sucu were the operations in the north 3 in the
south there were risings rather than wars. Augustus
put down the Musulami and Gaetulians who dwell
near the Syrtes, through the agency of Cossus, who
thus gained the name of Gaetulicus, a title more
extensive than his actual victory warranted. He
entrusted the subjugation of the Marmarides and
Garamantes to Quirinius, who likewise might have
returned with the title of Marmaricus, had he not
been too modest in estimating his victory.

XXXII. THE Ammmm Wffl

ΙΝ the east the Armenians caused more trouble.
Hither Caesar sent one of the Caesars, his grandsons.

341

