BOOK 1. V.

ordered the cavalry to discard their bits—another
new device—in order that they might charge with
greater vigour. So desperate was the fight at last
that a tradition has been handed down that gods
were present as spectators. Two young men 011
white horses sped over the battle-field like stars
across the heavens3 and no one doubted that they
were Castor and Pollux. The Roman commander,
therefore, himself prayed to them and, bargaining
for victory, promised them a temple, and carried
out his promise as though in payment to the gods
who were his comrades in arms.

Hitherto they had fought for their freedom5
they presently were at war with these same Latins,
persistently and without intermission, in defence
of their frontier. Cora (though it seems incredible)
and Alsium were formidable: Satricum and Corni-
culum were provinces- Over Verulae and Bovillae,
l am ashamed to say it—but we triumphed. Tibur,
now a suburban retreat, and Praeneste, now a
charming summer resort, were attacked after the
offering of solemn vows in the Capitol. Faesulae
meant the same to us then as Carrhae1 lately
meant3 the Arician Wood corresponded to the
Hercynian Forest,2 Fregellae to Gesoriacum,3 the
Tiber to the Euphrates. The capture of Corioli—
alas for the shame of it l—was regarded as so
glorious an achievement that Gnaeus Marcius be-
came Coriolanus, taking the city into his name, as
though he had conquered Numantia or Africa. Spoils
wou from Antium still exist, which Maenius fixed
up on the tribunal of the forum after the capture
of the enemies' fleet—if it can be called a fleet,

² See p. 337. ³ See pp. 205, 337.
35

